private library in the country.
I'm talking with Edwin Wolfe in Philadelphia, and Mr. Wolfe just said that he thought the Shady Library might be... Well, the greatest private library within its field, I mean, which means books that have made a tremendous difference in the history of man, including a Gutenberg Bible in the original Fogel Binding.
I wonder how many of those are privately owned.
I think this may be the last one.
And, of course, privately owned, I don't know how certain it is that everything's going to Princeton, but everybody sort of feels that.
They've allowed the building to be erected.
Right there.
It's sitting there.
It's quite an extraordinary arrangement.
I understand, though, that the...
The current Mr. Scheide has a daughter who's very interested in the collection.
I'll find out about this.
Yeah, sure.
The arrangement with Princeton was, hey, just let us use it.
Make it available to scholars.
And that's an important thing.
Well, Bill Scheide feels very strongly on that.
He believes that the book should be used by people who are doing serious research.
And he's always had a...
curator who knows the collection.
Bill Stoneham, I guess, is the man.
Man now.
Yeah.
You, of course, are of great interest to me.
You have had really two lives, it seems to me, in the world of books.
You worked for the man who was acknowledged to be the greatest dealer of the 20th century, and then you've had a career here in an institutional standpoint, and you can really speak
Well, I found that it was very interesting because over a period of time now, you see, I started at Rosenbach's in 1930.
That is now 60 years ago.
Wow.
And I had known during that period of time most of the major rare book people in the country.
There are a lot of private collectors I never knew.
For instance, Huntington, Morgan, or... Well, that's right.
I never knew them, and there's some more recent ones than that.
On the other hand, I did know Frank Hogan, for instance, and the Hydes, both Donald and Mary, and so forth and so on.
How about Bradley Martin?
Bradley Martin I knew.
Mrs. Doheny, I met.
Mrs. Doheny, you mention in the book quite often.
Yeah, I met, but that's all.
I mean, I didn't really know Mrs. Doheny.
John Fleming did most of the confrontation with the Countess.
It was confrontation?
Well, confrontation in the sense that... She granted audiences.
Well, no, she...
said, oh, sure, I'll look at it, but I'm not sure I'll buy it.
Was she a collector or an accumulator?
I think she may have been a collector.
She had certain ideas.
She collected things that had to do a couple of ways with religion.
She was a very religious woman.
She came from that kind of background, isn't it?
Yes, very religious.
Well, she left the whole lot to the diocese.
To the diocese, and then the diocese, of course, sold it.
But you can see in the older books that that was the thrust of her collecting.
She also bought four-edge paintings, which is something that I never understand anybody buying more than one of.
Because they're being made today.
You take a nice old binding and you give it to one of the artists who specialize in the field of four-edge paintings, and there you are.
Did she know her books as Bradley Martin?
I doubt that.
Or as Logan?
As Logan, certainly.
No, not the way Bradley Martin knew his.
Bradley was verging on being a scholar by all of them.
Oh, yes.
I have been.
in his Park Avenue apartment where the books were arranged.
He knew where everything was, and he knew what they were.
And he was a collector with really remarkable taste.
Philadelphia, as I get into it, is really an extraordinary book city.
It's really got a very noble, and I'm not just saying this, because I'm here.
Certainly, I'm here because I want to write about it.
It's important.
But you have a triumvirate, it seems, of Logan, Franklin, and Rosenbach, just for openers.
Yes.
And then take it from there.
And you have been, you have a connection with all of them.
Sort of.
Kind of.
Maybe you can talk a little bit about that for a bit.
Can I interrupt something later on, by the way?
Sure.
Go ahead.
No, you were talking about knowing so many collectors over the years.
Well, it's not only a question of collectors, but the...
really great men in the field of libraries.
Lawrence Roth, Clarence Brigham, Bill Jackson.
I mean, these are people I had correspondence with, I knew, I had drinks with, you know, the whole business.
And I am a little sorry.
These were bookmen.
I'm a little sorry that there's a trend away from
librarians being bookmen, and they're now administrators and fundraisers and whatnot, but not the same thing as these... the older generation was.
If you started in 1930, that would have made you a teenager, a mere... I was 18 years old.
...a mere lad.
18 years old.
Was this just something that you kind of fell into, or did this represent a love for books and...
I think I fell into it.
I had been in school in England.
I had decided that I'd learned enough and really didn't have to go to college.
And my father was a friend and lawyer of the Rosenbachs.
And he thought that Dr. Rosenbach's rare book business was the most glamorous thing in the world.
This was almost the peak of doctor's newspaper fame.
And so the doctor said, oh, sure, I'll take him on.
And there I went.
I had no skills to sell.
So I figured I might just as well learn one.
Well, I imagine you quickly learned to be a bibliographer.
I learned to be a bibliographer and a cataloguer and so forth and so on.
I bought a set of the Rosenbach catalogs.
They're bound.
Fascinating.
You don't see dealers today buying such extraordinary things for general stock.
If you see a dealer buying an auction today, it's usually because he has somebody he's buying for.
Usually.
You don't see general stock like that anymore.
Well... Maybe you do, but... Not the width or breadth that the Rosenbachs had.
from ninth century manuscripts to modern first editions.
It is often, I've heard it said any number of times, and I know that as a collector, you don't necessarily mistrust, but you have reservations about the dealer who also is a collector.
You somehow feel that perhaps, you know, he's pulling those things for himself.
I mean, you feel that.
Well, the doctor used to use that as a sales point.
gosh, if you don't take this, I'm going to take it home myself.
That kind of thing.
And in fact, he did take a lot of books on there, still at the Rosenbach.
But some of them are not the books that Dr. Rosenbach took home because he wanted.
The Americana is, very definitely, because that's what he was most interested in.
But some of the other things were
what hadn't been sold when the company folded or went out of business when Philip Rosenbach died.
We'll talk at some point about Philip, because mania is a word that we're going to have to explore in my book, and of course it's bibliomania, but you say in your book he had a mania to sell.
He had a mania, well, he had a mania to buy, but it was furniture.
Furniture and silver and things like that.
And it was only at the sort of end when the doctor was unwell that Philip started saying, oh, well, we've got to get rid of all this.
Yeah, you said he was consumed with a mania to sell.
But it indicates that he really didn't have the passion for the books.
He didn't know anything about the books.
I mean, to him it was a product.
It was something that you could turn into money.
Well, an awful lot of what he had.
was that.
He was not a connoisseur.
He wasn't even a connoisseur in the fields of furniture, fine arts, and so forth, which was his end of the business.
The result was that part of the business never made money.
The doctor made all the money and enabled his older brother to lose it.
You'd almost think that his brother didn't appreciate this towards the end.
I mean, the way he wouldn't allow these trips to England or... Well, that's right.
Actually, from the book, it appears that you're very gentle, but you said the doctor finally said, I wonder what took you so long when you quit, finally.
Well, I just wrote a little essay on Philip Rosenbach in which I discussed this.
Where is this going to be published?
In the minutes or the proceedings?
I have no idea whether it will ever be published.
I put, you know, some recollections down, put them in my computer.
But this is about Philip.
This is about Philip, and why.
I would just assume that it's not an affectionate memoir.
It is not an affectionate memoir, no.
He was an amazing man.
He had tremendous energy, most of it misdirected.
The doctor, on the other hand, and we say, we talk about Philip with the purpose of illumining the doctor, because Philip had no feel for the book.
If the doctor, in your words, what?
He loved books.
Did he have reverence?
Did he have true reverence?
He loved books.
I mean, this was his life.
And it was that enthusiasm which made him such a good salesman.
I mean, here was something, and he knew about it.
And as you know, you know from the book, the doctor business was an honest Ph.D.
And he had read.
That's a very important point.
He read a great deal, and knew a great deal.
And this, it was impressive.
It was impressive, and he had a fantastic memory, as all good book men should have.
All good book men should have, exactly.
Fantastic memory.
He, of course, in Books and Bitters, he diagrams his fascination.
He outlines how he became the fascination.
So you went to work in 1930.
Would you have considered yourself, I hesitate to say, let's say a bibliophile, but he's not a bibliomaniac.
Well, I would have, I suppose, I would have considered myself a bookman.
It's a simpler word.
Tell me what a bookman is.
We've talked about it, and maybe in your words, so I can quote you.
A bookman is somebody who has a knowledge of,
how they're made, what their history is, what they're like, what's inside them.
All those things combined together with a feeling for them.
And that's a feeling for how they look, the type, the whiteness of the paper, the margins, the binding, all this, which is, I can only describe a sensuous feeling.
They feel right.
I was introduced to the 18th century when I was at school in England.
Now, where did you study in England?
At a school called B-Dales, B-E-D-A-L-E-S.
The master in an English class was discussing the Augustans, among whom, of course, was swift.
And he gave me an 18th century edition of two of Smith's, Swift's comic miscellaneous, which I read was introduced to the long S for the first time, but here was something that looked and smelled and had all the aura of the period.
And that I found absolutely amazing.
It started me collecting.
I was a collector from the beginning.
Well, I have a question here for you.
Were you ever a collector?
So you just, maybe you could just talk a little bit about, as you were talking about that, yeah.
Yes, I started.
In the context of talking about the Bookman.
Well, I had collected all my life, from even before I went to...
I thought I ought to buy an old book if I was going to work for them, so I bought a couple old books, and I started collecting along two lines.
Modern First Editions, I picked all the wrong ones.
So that was a mistake which I gave up.
Who did you collect, for instance?
Kipling, Shaw, Colesworth.
Well, I mean, they're still collectible.
They're still collectible, but...
Who should you have collected, then?
Who do you regret not having collected?
Oh, well, I wouldn't collect moderns, anyway.
I think it's...you don't...well, I wouldn't want to do it.
I also collect...you see, I had to collect and have collected things that, first, the Rosenbachs wouldn't be interested in.
And then things that the library guy wasn't competing with the library company.
In other words, I, once upon a time, had some American imprints.
When I came to the library company, I gave them to the library company, and I could buy American imprints thereafter.
For yourself.
For myself.
I did have an idea from the very beginning of collecting 18th century books in old findings.
And I was going to do what everybody or lots of people have done.
The hundred books most likely to have been found in the colonial American library.
The library company had copies of all of them.
They had the whole hundred?
It never became a formal list.
It's like Lily trying to get the 100th.
He has 99 of the glory of the 100th.
Yeah, but you see that there is no list.
There is no list.
But I think you could develop one.
There is no list until somebody writes it.
That's right.
Well, I was collecting along those lines, and of course it got way beyond 100 after a comparatively
Where did you hunt?
Around here?
No, no.
I was buying mostly from catalogs in England at that time, but I bought them comparatively recently, and I had given them all to the library company.
So they're here.
That's great.
They're going to be in this place eventually.
Really?
What's the name of the room we're in here, by the way?
London.
Of course.
That's yours?
It's all part of my life.
I don't know why.
It's a beautiful look at this one.
Well, I had the whole thing to do with these.
There's probably a hundred and fifty foot there.
Oh, well.
They're more than that.
That's what condition has been on so far.
Obviously condition was always a very important consideration.
Well, I like to have contemporary bindings.
And so you started, you said that's a fairly recent endeavor of yours.
Yeah, until I gave it to the... Recent, like when, starting when?
The 1950s?
What, did I start buying those?
1930s I started buying
fairly recently.
We moved from a rather large house to a small house, and I had shared books all over.
It kills you, doesn't it?
It did kill me.
But these ended up... The library company, like the American Antiquarian Society, has a cutoff date.
Yours is 1880, I guess, for what I'm providing.
Well, approximately.
Yeah.
And the society goes to 76, I guess.
But that helps.
That really helps in your class.
Well, you see, 1880 is the time when the library company was ensconced in its two buildings, which had then had one at the corner here of Juniper and Locust, and the other in South Philadelphia.
And it marks, we left the old city, in other words.
And that marks
period in the library company's history, and I thought it was a reasonable date.
Is there, um, we talked, to return to this, this concept of bibliomania, is there such a thing of institutional bibliomania, do you think?
Uh, well, I, I suppose there... That's just something that came to me this morning in the airplane.
Uh, I suppose there is, there are some institutions
that have a policy of buying, I have a strong feeling that a collection which is not augmented becomes dead very quickly, because there isn't much interest in it.
You see, you have to have the interest of the owner or the institutional director in a collection, or
It becomes inhuman rather than humane.
Isn't that interesting?
Augmented in terms of... The being adding to it.
Adding to it.
I read where when you took over here, shortly after you left Rosenbach, that you were finding, quote, fresh discoveries on a daily basis.
That's right.
Things that people had forgotten were here.
How did that happen?
Because nobody cared.
You know, that does happen.
The library company, for many, many years before I got here, was spending most of its time, energy, and money on running a lending library, which is how it started, of course.
But the deterioration, the quality of the books, was unbelievable.
So being a lending library, while a noble thing to do, does not necessarily lend itself to
stimulating scholarship.
And besides, you see, by 1880 again, by then, there were many other libraries that were in business.
Lending books?
Well, no, building collections for research purposes.
Another thesis that I'm exploring is the role of the collector in preserving history.
And you can, you know, you think I'm stretching on that?
No, no, no, I don't think you're stretching at all.
Things which otherwise would be lost.
You think of, to go to England, Pepys' wonderful library, which he ordered.
Nothing is to be added, nothing is to be taken away.
Consequently, you have a unique library of items that can be found.
Francis Parkland going south after the Civil War to get these broadsides and almanacs, which...
It makes, you know, the Athenaeum's creation preeminent.
And again, these are extensions of what the collector is doing.
And then you have these libraries, which I don't know if they're unique to the United States, but you have this, you have the Antiquarian Society, you have the Folger, you have the Huntington, you have the Morgan.
All of which started because of a collector.
That's right.
But also, well, the library company didn't start because of a collector.
It started because of the need for books.
It is unique, isn't it, in this country?
I hesitate to use the word unique, never use the word unique.
No, well, it was different.
It's different.
The Redwood Library in Newport is done the same way.
The various acronyms were started the same way.
You mean as this?
As this, yes, to provide books for its members.
The library company was fortunate.
in that while it had one fire, the damage was not very great, and the books were kept.
I hate to say it, but largely because they weren't used.
The old books, that is.
And that's the reason for the survival almost intact of James Logan's library, which was really remarkable.
You contrasted, say, to the cotton
Robert Cotton's library in England, which was virtually destroyed in a fire.
Right.
Well, the Jefferson Library at the Library of Congress, which was largely, well, major.
John Harvard's collection at Harvard, I think.
They probably have three volumes they're stretching us, you know?
Right.
Speaking of Harvard, in your book,
You mentioned, and this is something maybe we could talk about, you mentioned that Arthur Houghton was the preeminent collector of his day, one of the greatest collectors of his time.
Right.
And yet he stopped.
He's still alive.
He not only stopped, but he sold his books.
Why?
Do you have any idea?
Don't ask me, because I have the vaguest idea.
It seemed to me... As a young man, too, I mean, he did this fairly well.
He wasn't thinking about the great beyond, let's put it that way.
I don't think he was.
And he certainly didn't need the money.
Why did he give them to Harvard?
He gave them a wonderful structure.
Well, he gave them his teach things.
He did not sell those.
But, no, I don't understand why.
I was at the sale at Christie's in London, and really,
I couldn't figure out why Arthur Hogan sold the books.
Did you ever ask him?
No.
Did it come as a surprise when you heard that he was going to sell the books?
Yes, very definitely.
Very definitely.
Because he was an enthusiastic collector.
I mean, when he started collecting and when he and the doctor sat around drinking,
He was really an enthusiastic collector.
He, too, knew what he was buying.
He had great taste.
Exquisite taste.
Great, yeah.
No, he was a... He was one of the people I took to him, some of the chapters of Rosenbach, because I wanted him to read it and see what he thought of it.
Is he a fairly accessible man?
He was then.
I don't know how accessible he is now.
I mean, he was accessible to me then.
How old would you say he is right now?
I think he's just a little bit older than I am, which would make him very close to 80.
I'm curious to see if he'd talk to me.
Look him up and know who's who.
I figured I'd do that, yeah.
Very, very close to it one way or another.
You don't know where he lives offhand.
I think he lives in Maryland at the Y Plantation.
I am sure he has an apartment in New York.
I'm asking this, because I'll get that for sure.
I'm sure he has an apartment in New York.
But he just...there has been a Houghton Library, I think, since 1941.
So we're talking 50 years.
He was about 29, 30 years old when he did that.
He was very young.
Some people say that they are as interested in why some people stopped collecting equally as interested in why they started.
Harrison Horner was another one.
He remained interested in photography, I guess.
They just had an exhibit at the Houghton Library on this Thomas Phillips stuff.
But yet, he's... Jerome Curran.
Of course, I think Jerome wanted the money.
Yeah, I think he may have needed the money.
I gather that Harrison didn't need the money either.
I wonder what happens.
Do you have a window in that?
I really don't have a window.
I would say that, well, in Harrison's case, he started collecting something else.
Now, not of the quality of the things that he had been collecting, but still it may have been in his instance when he gave up his boat.
He used to sail a great deal, and I think he stopped doing that.
And since his collection had a nautical flavor, it could have been that.
How do you feel to jump around
We have the example of Bradley Martin, and I guess we've talked about, there has been considerable discussion about that recently, the finest ornithological collection of private hands, arguably one of the finest anywhere.
Why didn't he, his family didn't need the money, we're talking about the Bessemer Trust, why did he not make plans to send it to an institution?
Not that you would know, but I guess
There are some people who have a feeling they enjoyed collecting.
Once books go into an institution, no individual enjoys those books in the same fashion again.
Some people want to have a library with their name on.
Some don't care.
Robert Ho is said to have said, it's in Beverly Chew's introduction to the catalogs, which I have, is that where would I be if it weren't for other collectors?
That's right.
And there's a lot to be said for that, I guess.
Right.
And I guess, how do you feel?
You've been in the institution as the director of an institution who would love to get a preeminent library.
You'd say, gee, I'd love to get that library.
But then on the other hand, as one who worked with Rosenbach,
You'd say, gee, I'd like to get this... Well, I have done... Do you have a duality of feelings on this?
I have a duality of feelings and a duality of action.
Perhaps you could expand on that.
When I had to get rid of books when we moved, I both gave away and sold.
You're talking about you personally.
Me personally.
So that this was six of one, half a dozen of another, really.
And I had inherited and added to a collection from my father of Lord Nelson and Lady Hamilton material.
And half of it has already been sold at Christie's in London.
The other half will be sold.
Well, I might have given that away if I could have.
figured any place in this country that really was a logical place.
I couldn't.
The Naval Academy?
No, they wouldn't care.
They wouldn't care.
No, I don't.
I gave a good deal of thought to that, and really couldn't think of a logical thing, and I did not feel
I wanted to give it to the British Library, where it would have been appropriate, or to Greenwich, where it might have been appropriate.
Well, if they want it badly enough now, they can buy it, I guess.
Well, I doubt that they bought much of it.
That's a very fascinating story that you have in the book on Yale and the Besson book.
That's a fascinating... I mean, I find...
that really... Well, I can tell you now, when I wrote that up, I wrote it from everything I'd been told by everybody.
I sent a copy to Jim Babb, and he was furious.
He felt that I had put too much of John's
Fleming's story in, and too little of his.
Well, did you give him an opportunity to... And I gave him an opportunity.
Well, what appeared in the book was the third rewrite.
We had an umpire in this, and I was working through Fritz Liebert after the initial.
And, you see, the original story that I had gotten that Jim objected to was that John said when he was bidding in the book, Jim Babs said to him, you've got to get this for me, it's worth my job.
He said that didn't happen.
John said it did happen.
And why would John have done it otherwise?
Well, there were a couple things that made it.
If Mrs. Harkness had not withdrawn, they would have come awful close to having the money.
And then again, I guess it was a terrific amount of money in those days, but you look at the figures, you know, it's no big deal.
Nothing.
I mean, the thing should have been able to be resolved.
Oh, sure.
You think so.
You're dealing with people to whom this is not a lot of money in any case.
That's right.
No, it was, well, it was an aberration, but it was the highest price an American book had ever fetched.
A printed book, yeah.
Well, I was at the Garden Limited Sale in November, where Dick Manny spent $2 million for these Shakespeare's, and they're really not the finest.
I mean, they're nice.
There are four, and they've got a pretty nice provenance.
But Krauss was offering them 15 years ago for $165,000.
We're talking about geometric progressions.
That's right.
And the increments on the bids were,
$50,000 a pop.
It opened at $5.
It goes to $5.56.
I was there.
I taped it.
$50,000 is what Ho paid for Gutenberg.
Well, that's a long time ago.
But what do you think when you see prices like this?
It probably doesn't surprise you.
Maybe it's just... No, I have a very good answer for that.
Money isn't worth anything.
Books are.
Well, the same thing's true in paintings, only worse.
Well, except the Japanese spent $20 million for de Koonin, a painting by a living artist.
Yeah, well, it doesn't make any sense at all to me, but you know there are areas in the book where I now am collecting something different, and I'm putting out
Victorian, fancy American Victorian bonding.
So it's in your blood, right?
Well, you know.
What's the kick for you?
The kick for me is, even when I was here, is to start collecting in a field that nobody else is interested in.
Make it fashionable.
Get yourself a pretty damn good collection
before the prices go up.
And also while the titles are available, you mean?
I started here collecting black history when it was still called Negro History.
This was for yourself or for the library?
For the library company.
Now, give me a sense of the transference.
Now, you were here collecting for the library, applying your knowledge, your skill as a bookman, your background.
But did you get as much of a kick out of the acquisition?
Here?
Yeah.
Oh, yes, certainly.
See, that's part of what I'm saying, institutional bibliomania in a way.
Well, I had become, you know, the collector, me and the library company.
I love that phrase that you used to describe yourself.
I've got to find it.
Oh, well, I didn't.
That was somebody else.
Bibliotecarius.
That's because we didn't have any computers then, and we didn't do a lot of things.
We had a card catalog.
We had all kinds of things, and everybody was telling me, oh, well, that's old-fashioned.
I said, well, you'll find that it works.
Well, I'm doing a lot of my research at the Widener at Harvard, and it's amazing.
Even I can't believe you just go and you type in a key word in a computer.
That's right.
We're talking 11 million books, you know, at the Widener.
Well, it took me a while to get myself a personal computer, a word processor.
And I must say, I use it all the time.
I don't know what I did before.
What did you get?
I got an Epsom.
What's the software?
Word.
Good.
Excellent.
Well, it works.
I mean, it works for me and saves an unbelievable amount of time.
You've given me some wonderful information.
How about people you think I should be talking to for this book if I look interested in collectors?
The flavor, the ambiance of book collecting, in your experience, I'm trying to hit as many as I can.
I get David Kirchenbaum, which I think is just a marvelous hit, you know, to get David.
It's a strange thing.
I just don't know many collectors now.
Well, book people.
Well, book people, yes, you talk to Marcus McHarrison, of course.
Of course, and Marcus started at Harvard, and I'll be going down to see Mr. Scheide and Dave Kirshenbaum, as I mentioned, Rostenberg and Stern, these two women in New York who might have some—I haven't talked to them yet, but I think they might have some cute stories.
Right.
Just in case, I've talked to Nicholas Parker already.
Have you talked to Mary Benjamin?
No, who's Mary Benjamin?
Mary Benjamin's in the autograph business.
She has been mentioned.
You have a second one.
She is a remor... I haven't seen her for years.
This is her uncle's business or something?
She's in New York someplace.
I haven't seen her for years, but she was absolutely great.
Eugene Field, who's speaking of Mary Benjamin and Rostenberg and Stern.
I mean, you do mention Amy Lowell in your book, by the way.
She's quite an interesting person.
It has been, I think, women have been unfairly maligned.
Well, have you talked to Mary Hyde?
I haven't, no.
Well, you know, she's a lady, you know, what's her name?
Where is she?
Well, she's in New York, and she's in London, and she's in New Jersey.
What's her name?
God.
She's Viscountess.
She is?
She married me.
A major collector?
She is a major.
She is a major collector.
She has the finest Johnson collection, the finest Oscar Wilde collection.
Really?
Yeah.
Oh.
I didn't know her.
Well, I don't know her.
I don't know her.
This is the first I'm learning of her.
Yeah, it's a black hole for me.
I don't know her.
Oh, well, I'm amazed at that.
Well, I'm in the early stages of the research.
Yeah, but I mean, she is... That's why I ask for... She is... She and Donald Hyde, her husband, who was a lawyer, started collecting books, and Don died.
He was president of Glow Your Club, among other things.
And Eccles, Viscountess Eccles, E-C-C-L-E-S.
Viscountess Eccles, isn't that something?
And her husband is David Eccles.
I mean, you don't call him a Viscount Lord Eccles.
You know them?
Oh, yeah, sure I know them.
I've known her since she was an early customer of Rosenbach.
Was she a collector?
She was both a collector.
She was doing getting her doctoral, writing a doctoral thesis on Jacobean plays.
And she has written two very well-received books on Mrs. Thrail.
Really?
Under the name of Mary Hyde?
Under the name of Mary Hyde.
I'll check it out.
But she is a major...
A living male collector.
A major one.
I'm going to have a section on women collectors, I think.
And she knows.
There were other women collectors.
Well, the Groyer, you mentioned the Groyer, is going to have a show.
I think next month.
That's right.
And Marie Corrie is putting it together.
And Ruth Mortimer from Smith, I guess.
The two of them are doing it.
I've talked to Bob Nightkirk.
Well, I'll get, believe me,
That's why I ask.
There's always a name that somebody else has forgotten to give me.
Mary Hyde.
I think Mary Hyde is vice president of the Glowier Club now.
You see we have that circled here several times.
She is a major figure.
That's wonderful.
I talked to Tom Tanzel at the Glowier Club.
He's very supportive of my project as well.
I'm just going to...
a little bit about Logan.
That's a great book, by the way, which he did.
And maybe we can, I think, to give us some historical perspective, he really is a giant in American books, in a history of American books.
There's no doubt about it, because he knew more about the insides of more different kinds of books than any other American colonial times.
Amazing.
And when you think of what he had to go through to get books.
Well, he ordered them from England.
I mean, this is the, well, England, Germany, Holland.
He got them all kinds of ways.
But he also annotated, which is the fascinating part of his library.
And he was implacable.
Somebody made a mistake.
The marginal note points it out.
No kidding?
So he was a brilliant man, would you say?
He was a brilliant man?
Yeah, I would say he was a very brilliant man.
I mean, anybody who, by himself, at the beginning of the discovery, could teach himself calculus, he is the only American I know who wrote a classical textual
study, which was published in a Dutch scholarly periodical at the beginning of the 18th century, but a textual study.
It's amazing to me.
Now, did you find this stuff out here?
Well, I mean, as you were basically cataloging his stuff?
as I was pulling it off the shelves.
How did you become, how you came to learn about Logan?
There was a whole... Yeah, that's fine.
Go ahead.
There was a whole balcony in the old building that was the Logan collection.
And going into this, what did you know, how much did you know about Logan?
Very little.
I mean... So this was really an assignment, this was something
This was discovery for you as much as anybody else.
That's right.
As much as it was work and cataloging.
I started pulling those books down, and they were such fabulous books.
I mean, to think that these were here in this country and had been used, you see.
I also worked at one time in picking up a little bit on books from Franklin's Library.
Well, it's very difficult to know what books he used, unless he specifically said he used them, frankly.
You can't tell from the books the way you can with the Logan books.
Well, of course, today, and who knows when this started, you don't want it to face a book.
You know, like in writing books, I certainly don't.
Well, you don't want it to face a book, but...
Only when he becomes Logan, you know, that you simply have his annotations in there.
Well, you see, it just depends.
I don't annotate books very much, but I have annotated a couple, where I feel, you know, I have added considerably to what it... Well, you come to it as a scholar, too, as somebody who has knowledge...
of the subject that nobody else has, and so that does make that a synergistic kind of a thing, where you're adding something.
Maybe, maybe, maybe.
But, no, I was attracted to Logan because he was a curmudgeon.
He was quite unpopular in the democratic... For political reasons.
For political reasons.
He wrote... He was aloof, I think, intellectually aloof too, wasn't he?
Well, he found very few people that he thought were his intellectual equal.
And there were a few, but not many, but he was very kind to some of them who were quite humble, like John Bartram.
And Godfrey, who went on and developed a better quadrant, Mariner's quadrant, but he was very good to them, because he thought they had native intelligence, not academic intelligence, but native intelligence, and could learn.
And there were a number of other people.
His quotes on books, though, just on what books mean to him are, you know, every one is quotable.
I mean, I intend to use any number of them in my own study.
I mean, this is a guy who I would imagine the big thing about coming to this country was the fact that he wouldn't have easy access to his books.
I mean, I would think that's the one thing that's right.
Well, he sold his library, his first library, which I found hard to believe.
with 700 volumes for somebody not quite 20.
That's a lot of books in those days.
For anybody.
700 books today for anybody that age.
Right.
Unusual.
But anyway, let's return to this process of discovery on your part, taking this stuff off and going through.
and what you learned about the guy and how you came to appreciate it, I guess.
Yeah.
You were talking about that.
Oh, yeah.
Well, the more I saw, the more amazed I was at his virtuosity and the fact that books are my disease, he said.
And they were indeed.
And as he withdrew more and more from active politics and business in the 1740s, he turned more to books.
And this is when you get those big orders of books from England, one thing after another, and this complaint because he collated the book and it was missing something,
It was in bad shape and he sent it back and complained about the price.
He could get one cheaper.
And you found all this stuff here?
Found it all, yeah.
And it was just lying here for centuries, really.
Waiting your... Waiting somebody to come say, gee gosh.
But that's what a collection is all about, isn't it?
We don't know when it's going to be, when it's going to come forth and reveal itself.
Well, you know, it wasn't only the Logan books, of course.
There were all kinds of things that the library companies... No, it wasn't apathy, was it?
Was it apathy that allowed the stuff to kind of... To a certain extent, yes.
The directors of the library company really didn't care about old books.
And the librarians really didn't care about old books.
all the way through the 19th century.
How do Logan's books... I'm going to just turn the tape on the other side before...